---
layout: posts
title: "On Being Self-aware and Breaking cycles"
categories: Life
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "Therapy, Self-observation and learning from others"
math: true
---

A prerequisite to breaking negative patterns and cycles is awareness that such patterns exist. Only after being aware can we identify tangible steps to be extra careful about our ways of thinking and behaving. And we need to fully accept that we were in the wrong but not take it too far to say that we are not capable of change.

Yes, perhaps some people are more hardwired than others in terms of “iredeemability”. It is important to call out people. I won’t talk about the dangers of the online call out culture. That’s something for another day. Being challenged and being confronted about my own behavior is important to me. And not taking things too personally is something that I have also been practicing. So I am quite appreciative of people who give me feedback.

But my appreciation for feedback, regardless of delivery, sometimes makes me forget that there are other people who need to hear feedback in a sugar-coated way, specially on a bad day for them. That part I am trying to be careful about. I can ocasionally get too blunt.

There are traits we see in a variety of disorders. They are often comorbid traits - obsessiveness, the inability to concentrate, a fragile self-esteem. In combination with other traits, there may be some tendency for us to pathologize people specially through confirmation bias. I am quite guilty of this too, but mostly for pathologizing myself. And I have sometimes believed the “unofficial” diagnoses from people I cared about - that I might be in the autism spectrum or have OCD, and sadly be covertly narcissistic. But I also think that I objectively don’t tick many boxes that officially categorizes me under those labels. But does it super matter? I'm not so sure. I think what matters more if there are traits that could be insidious and particular emotions that need to be regulated. Then we work on those particular symptoms and their underlying causes. And I do not think the underlying causes are the labels. For me they are simply for bookkeeping.

We all have some of these “weird” traits. Some of them are quite useful - an obsession with numbers and facts, the ability to see things in another point of view, creativity. Some of them are red flags but some could be benign. I guess anything in excess is bad. So these traits when regulated are ok. But when these get out of hand, we have to be careful about not harming or hurting other people, making them uncomfortable, and eventually hurting our own selves. We cannot try to change other people but we can make them aware. It may be hard to rewire our brain, but studies show it might be more malleable and plastic than we think (ok, I’m lazy to dig up a study. Lol).

I observe myself a lot. And I observe people too because I’m trying to learn from them. Most people in my life are good, but I don’t really think I have good and bad bins. I think I “judge” people and see them slide from left to right in the "spectrum of good" based on my interactions with them. And I collect more data through time and get to know them more. I then decide if they are worth keeping connected with. But now I am more conscious that it not be in a forced or contrived way so that both parties are comfortable. Of course these are all thoughts in my head and we sometimes overestimate/underestimate how we may act in real life.

Such self-observation for me is quite helpful to address internal turmoil with or without the presence of external turmoil.

Sometimes I slip and forget about these things I already learned. This emotion-regulation thing is a kind of a muscle that needs to be exercised. Same with the “delight” muscle, the “compassion” muscle and so on... and also the “funny” muscle. To laugh in the face of adversity is such an important thing (without minimizing someone’s feelings, it must be said!)!

## What I think a good therapist is. We all have narcissistic traits

I’m going to have to look for a new therapist soon. I like my therapist now but one time she was not available and I needed to meet someone urgently. So I met "Dr. B". He is the one that talked to me about the tendency of CBT to be reductionistic. We had one meeting and he made quite an impact on me. We talked about suffering and the meaning of life, and he asked me if I've read Viktor Frankl's book. I was 80% into the book then. I told him that I was afraid that I was an actual narcissist and that I might be hurting people because of it. And I was "suffering" with that thought. He told me "with the limited interaction that we have, you do not strike me as a narcissist". It mattered a lot to me that he didn't say that "YOU ARE NOT A NARCISSIST!" with absolute certainty.

He said further that sometimes we all need some ego and a sense of belief in oneself. E.g. if some genuinely good-natured politician didn't have an ego that they think they could contribute to the world, then they wouldn't go out there to actually do something. I told him at the end "I just want to stroke your ego right now and tell you that you are really good!". He told me, sometimes it’s just about the right fit.

I think objectively I can describe why Dr. B worked for me and why I like my current therapist. They were “challenging and direct but not judgmental”. And they let me explore options in life and make my own decisions. Esther Perel suggested these things to look for in a new therapist. You actually want someone who would listen to you, be empathetic but not to much because you still want them to call you out on your shit.

So in the end, I never got any professional to diagnose me as a narcissist. But the thought that I am lingered because, the person I lived with for 5 years persistently called me one in the last few months. And even if she's just "one data point", for me she held the most weight. She was my wife and was my best friend. It hurts me deeply that she is hurting. But I think I've reached a point that I can separate the things I know I need to work on and the claims that are quite unfair. I do understand that she is coming from a place of mistrust and hurt. And she is free to share her truths.

Therapy was very helpful for me. I was finally able to stand firm in disentangling with someone who is fundamentally very different from me. We've been talking about this for more than a year. It's not fair to say that one of us just discarded the other. We tried and persisted longer than we should've even if the romantic feelings have long been gone for one of us. We mustn't let guilt and duty decide for us to stay in an arrangement that is clearly unhealthy for both parties. The divorce might take a while and I need to be patient. I think it's the more human thing to do to wait a little longer. But we have to do eventually fully disentangle, economically and on paper, for both our sake. My papers will expire eventually and so this disentangling will have a natural time limit that I do not impose myself. My only request is that refrain from putting each other down. It is not doing us any good. And we should honor our agreement.
