---
layout: posts
title: "My Favorite Place and some changes"
categories:
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "Trouver de nouveaux amis dans un nouvel endroit"
math: true
---

One afternoon, in between work, I was feeling a little lonely.
I messaged Mbel. "*I am wondering why I know I like solitude, and know I can connect with people and strangers but feel loneliness... I don't know if it's just because I am in a new place. I like it here but sometimes I feel the lonely feeling.*"

I mean, the lonely feeling just passes. At least for the first month, there would not be a day where I will not feel profoundly sad. And then, I accomplish some work, meet some nice people, or attend improv, talk with my roomies, I'd feel reasonably happy. And then my favorite feeling of all is when I look at the mountains - the Jura and the Alps, where the Mont Blanc is. That feeling I had five years ago looking at those mountains has not changed. I still love that feeling of awe and wonder.

It is true that I no longer have those triggers that got me into a crippling spiral of unhealthy self-examination. I thought it was necessary because I needed to be aware if I was hurting other people.
I am happy that I went here early even if my adviser offered to pay the rebooking of my flight. It was quite tough with the broken leg but the logistical problems were not insurmountable. Public transportation here is incredibly PWD-friendly and medical care in France was something I could afford to pay upfront. But me accomplishing things were slower because of my disability. And I also had the challenge to learn French reasonably quick. I think I've learned enough French to answer questions in words or phrases, but I still couldn't form good sentences. I had moments that I thought, ugh, I should have delayed the flight, but most of the time I tell myself "good decision." I am happy here. Most days. I am happy most of each day.

But I still don't really have a friend here. Like someone I'd discuss my many thoughts with. Or what I feel. It's just not the same even if there's social media. Seeing their faces, looking at their eyes, hearing them laugh, you don't get that. I was also hesitant to leave because I was going to lose my social support. It was robust. And then here, zilch.

So each and every act of kindness, I remembered. Mamadou and Rose, they'd always make me feel happy. I'd practice french with Rose and she'd always ask me about my foot. I love it when I finish paying for my food she'd say "Merci Ma Belle, au revoir". It's the sweetest thing. And my first hug was from her too. Mamadou would always get my plate and bring it to the table. These two were consistently nice. That is why I remember them. And there were the strangers. The strangers who'd open and hold doors, the strangers who'd lift my scooter over steps when there aren't ramps. I don't even ask for help. They just help. So, it's super corny, but my heart is full. Gosh, humans ain't so bad.

My roomies, my improv group, some Colombians, and recently a group of Filipinos have been building up my growing friends group. But the social group is still in it's nascent stage.

My go-to person really right now is Mbel. And when I really feel down she'd call me. I told her I don't know why she seems to have the right words to make me feel better. I heard from someone that according to Buddhist philosophy has a definition for "eloquence". It is the capacity to reduce suffering. Mbel is THAT eloquent.

So even if others seem distant, I am happy that I have her. I have that anchor. The same anchor I have with my real mum. And it gives me the confidence to find new friends even if our times in here together won't last that long. It also gives me that extra mental gas to focus on work - "nah, you're actually fine alone for now".

I like this place a lot though. I'm in a good place. If I could put all the people that mattered to me here, I'd live here forever. This is my favorite place in the world. But it probably won't be my favorite if I didn't get paid. If I weren't I'll just live in the mountains and forage. No problem.

*P.S. I love my mums and they luv me but they also tell me if I've done things wrong like straight to my face. I don't think love should be seen as a zero sum game, so my love for anyone has or had an independent existence. If "you" happen to read this.*

## Changes

I've decided on a few things for the next few months. I am writing it here for accountability. Most of the things I write in here, I've followed through. As a form of self-therapy on putting in the work for HCAL and the dissertation, I have chosen specific topics of interest to explore and write about. They are topics that I would read and explore deeply. I would not necessarily make new studies but I would probably just regurgitate information that I have absorbed. I would probably have time to do simulation studies for fun on my breaks but my priorities are HCAL and research. I need to have fun but I also don't want to get fired! So since these topics would be more well-thought of, the release would be few and far between. I will continue with my particle physics blogging which would be really self-serving. (Ugh, everything's self-serving here. How many people knows this blog? Lol.) And finally, I will remove the useless "About Me" tab in my homepage. It contains nothing anyway. I will replace it with projects, and things in my GitHub portfolio. I would like to be hired after graduation. I should get started. Finally, I need to reformat some images and texts. This blog is getting ugly and almost uncurated.

So, changes in summary:

0.) More Particle Physics Blogging + Hardware
1.) Sparse, general knowledge topics e.g. Brain Data, Charity and Social Justice etc.
2.) GitHub Portfolio
3.) Reformatting

Again, for accountability.
