---
layout: posts
title: "Solving Problems: Deconstructing Loneliness"
categories: Life
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "Answering some questions on loneliness, work, and presence vs nexting"
math: true
---

The past few months, I had been thinking about certain things that affect my life in major ways. I wanted to write and share them in this series. The first one is about **loneliness**. We as humans are "wired for connection" as Brené Brown says. Sometimes, loneliness creeps in and out and if it stays for too long it can make us question our worthiness. It is normal to sometimes have feelings of self-doubt but we must also recognize when it is no longer at a healthy level. So what was making me lonely? What helped me address my problem?

The next issue was finding 'satisfaction' and 'meaning' in my work. My work doing physics analysis and software work, is not the kind of job you can do from 9 am to 5 pm. (Although Cal Newport claims he could do so). It is quite difficult to put timelines or predict how long some work can be completed. I tried and I failed. Being expected to deliver work on two projects meant "splitting my brain" into two thinking modes. I thought I could work deeply for 6 hours a day and that I should push myself daily to even just make incremental progress. But I crashed and burned in June. There were two things that helped me: Alan Watts's "Presence over Productivity" and a book on "Zen Programming". I thought that it was worth sharing some insights on my new practices based on those two philosophies. And also, the stuff that I still need to improve on.

Finally, there's the seemingly contradicting ideas of focusing on the "Here and Now" and "Preparing for the future". We as modern humans have this powerful ability to be able to simulate the future. Whether it's accurate or not is something we can talk about on another day. Whether we're planning to start family, preparing for an exam - doing "simulations" of what could happen serves an important purpose for our survival. Think of a pilot who trains in flight simulations so that they're prepared when an actual disaster happens. But some brains are kinda weird. We oversimulate the future and overburden the computational capacities of our brain. This leads to stress, fear, anxiety, feeling overwhelmed and not knowing what to do. Just like what I've talked about [here](https://uzzielperez.github.io/mental/health,/life/2020/08/30/Can-I-be-less-neurotic.html). So, here comes the importance of focusing on the "Here and Now". How can we be more "relaxed", more attentive to our present moment and yet not forget an important part of our ability to survive called "nexting"?

I'm going to write about these things in three parts. Am pretty excited about the thought of writing them! I just want to say that there's still a lot of *internal* work left to be done, but I am happy to make some progress and share them on not-so-bad day. I find that writing also just generally makes me feel better.


## Loneliness Issue

I have opened up to some friends about a general feeling of loneliness that I have felt during my time here in Geneva. I initially thought of going "out" to meet some people. But I had decided to cancel the "safe" meet-ups for an opportunity to stay in the foothills of the Jura to take care of cats. Needless to say, the isolation had done wonders for me. Ironic. I was able to address some core issues, had undergone some kind of reckoning. I had figured some things out. As I had told a friend of mine, the morning after a *dark night of the soul* makes one feel that it is worth going through that night.

Loneliness was just one of the issues I had spent some time thinking about. listening to Vivek Murthy's interviews with [Brené Brown](https://brenebrown.com/podcast/dr-vivek-murthy-and-brene-on-loneliness-and-connection/) and [Jameela Al Jamil](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/vivek-murthy/id1498855031?i=1000471097088) allowed me to think about the quality of my relationships. Dr. Murthy had deconstructed [three types of loneliness](https://blog.lareviewofbooks.org/interviews/lonely-different-reasons-talking-vivek-h-murthy/): intimate, relational, & collective. I know I have good quality intimate relationships but also acknowledge that I need to be more consistent and present with them. The relational aspect was what was largely missing, I guess for mostly everyone in the world. I didn't have the people I used to play soccer with, the people I played board games with, or the people I just hung out and had fun/geeky conversations with once a week or every other week. I do have some Filipino friends but we don't necessarily have the same interests. Finally, since CERN was mostly closed and it's only this week that people had started to come back, I was lacking a sense of community that I'm working with - i.e. a community that works towards a common goal. I felt disconnected. Now things are starting to feel a little better now that I've identified the probable source of my loneliness issues. And I am doing and have done something about them. Things are looking up.

I had just had a socially-distanced, open-air lunch with my friend at R2 at CERN and saw some people playing table tennis. (She is one of the new friends I really appreciate right now.) I noticed that this month, CERN had let people from other countries come back. I kind of have this funny voice in my head that says to some imaginary CERN folks, "Can you please be my friend? Can you please be my friend?". I have this temptation to just put myself out there and make as many friends or meet as many people as possible. We are social animals after all and are "wired for connection". But there's another inner voice that tells me "Why do I need new friends when I have good ones already?". I had taken the time to identify the good ones. They are not a lot but they were enough. I'm glad there are those two contradicting voices that brought me to a middle ground. I'm not as eager anymore to meet as many interesting people as possible. Am also not closing my doors entirely. And so far, it's ok. I don't feel so lonely anymore and I'm taking care of the people that matter!

But even if things are looking up - have had some good interactions worthy of documentation, and I don't feel so lonely anymore, there are still people that I miss or certain interactions that I miss. Dan Gilbert says that "the human brain is not particularly sensitive to the absolute magnitude of stimulation, but it is extraordinarily sensitive to differences and changes" ([Stumbling on Happiness](https://www.blinkist.com/en/books/stumbling-on-happiness-en/preview?utm_source=gsn&utm_medium=paid&utm_campaign=8190912715&utm_content=79904576850&utm_term=stumbling%20on%20happiness_e_431942557124_c_kwd-1728082325_CjwKCAjwwab7BRBAEiwAapqpTGZK6-yXwOKPN0kJKOP8PGyq_psNjh56n7rLTudM-bCSwa7DztdgFxoCgkYQAvD_BwE&gclid=CjwKCAjwwab7BRBAEiwAapqpTGZK6-yXwOKPN0kJKOP8PGyq_psNjh56n7rLTudM-bCSwa7DztdgFxoCgkYQAvD_BwE)). Nothing compares, yet. I have accepted the tangible reality of what it seems, and that these feelings are just there - cannot be denied nor shoved down. I'm not feeding them either. I'm just floating with time's forward-pointing arrow. Things can change with time.

Next up, "Presence over Productivity" and "Zen Programming".
