---
layout: posts
title: "Richard Feynman"
categories: Life, Physics
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "The next great mind since Einstein "
math: true
---

Updated: May 12, 2020, 11:35 PM CEST


Before I go for my quick mental health walk, and subsequently return to some deep work session tonight, I just want to write about Richard Feynman as a scientist and a human. It was his birthday yesterday.

In college, I loved reading biographies to look at the thought processes of scientists, artists or some world leaders. But there was one character that fascinated me most. It was Richard Feynman. He's irreverent, funny, a great communicator and an overall creative and brilliant physicist. He pursued the things that he found interesting specially later in life. But he also admitted that he had to choose which was worth pursuing since he knew he cannot learn everything! I haven't mentioned that he had also won the Nobel Prize for his work on Quantum Chromodynamics!

When I got a little older, life I realized his misogynistic tendencies. But I have also learned to look at his life and work with more nuance. Just like what Marie Curie had said "There is no connection between my scientific work and the facts of private life." Leonard Susskind gives a great overview of what made him such an interesting and unique character in his [TED Talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Waurx8e-1o). I believe his [parents](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QoNMjA2yPlw) had played a huge role in his genius.

From here I will focus on Feynman's idea of "understanding" and "knowing". For him knowing the name of something is different from understanding it. Quoting from this [blog](https://fs.blog/2015/01/richard-feynman-knowing-something/):

> **See that bird? It’s a brown-throated thrush, but in Germany it’s called a halzenfugel, and in Chinese they call it a chung ling and even if you know all those names for it, you still know nothing about the bird. You only know something about people; what they call the bird. Now that thrush sings, and teaches its young to fly, and flies so many miles away during the summer across the country, and nobody knows how it finds its way.**

It's also to nice to listen to how Richard Feynman said it himself in this [audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=45trtAfWhYg). And here is another [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ga_7j72CVlc) of him talking about the same idea. Ever since I got introduced to this way of thinking, I have been a little more careful about my own way of learning things, my own use of jargon in any presentation or scientific writing. And also I've become a tiny bit critical of other people's way of scientific writing or presentation (to tell myself, I should be careful not to fall into the trap of phoniness and merely sounding smart!). That is in addition to looking if the scientific methods are sound and unbiased.

Feynman has also influenced the way I view what science is and what scientists are doing to understand nature. And in my first job interview, I answered a question about the scientific process using [Feynman's analogy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o1dgrvlWML4) of how we are like some spectator of a game like Chess where some Gods are playing. We don't know the rules. But as we watch the game progress we figure out how the pieces work and move. And each time we see a peculiar action, we update our understanding of the pieces and their rules of movement. Those rules of movement and playing the game are analogous to the laws of nature. (I had a feeling, based on my interviewer's reaction that I had nailed the job because of this. She is the curator of the museum and now one of my closest friends.)

Moving away from science and more of something personal, I highlight Feynman's letter to his dead wife. Here it is read by [Oscar Isaac](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kVIx7luyuJw). It is necessary in the field of science to be realistic, to test your theories against reality by performing careful experiments. As Feynman said "*Science is a way of trying not to fool yourself. The principle is that you must not fool yourself, and you are the easiest person to fool.*" But in this letter I found this human side to him, of being somehow delusional, of being nostalgic... He was talking to his dead wife.


> **And now it is clearly even more true — you can give me nothing now yet I love you so that you stand in my way of loving anyone else — but I want you to stand there. You, dead, are so much better than anyone else alive... But you can’t help it, darling, nor can I — I don’t understand it, for I have met many girls and very nice ones and I don’t want to remain alone — but in two or three meetings they all seem ashes. You only are left to me. You are real. My darling wife, I do adore you...I love my wife. My wife is dead...Rich...PS Please excuse my not mailing this — but I don’t know your new address**
>

And somehow the cynic in me had died for a bit. The absolute cynic (2015-2019) that decided to settle for the idea of just being stable. I do have these tendencies also of idealizing some memory of someone in some place, but also being extra careful that I was not just deluding myself. But it is just a very human thing. What is important is to be conscious or aware of our tendencies of pinning or projecting our hopes and dreams onto someone. I also have increasingly enjoyed solitude despite my need for connection.

He had later remarried - a lot of women and wrong turns later! His second wife also seemed to be a cool, independent and interesting woman. He had had feelings for his second wife for a while and he had marked a date in the calendar telling himself "if my feelings for this person are still here after some time, I will ask her to marry me." That date came and she accepted the proposal. I thought that was a nice technique of checking himself and if was not just basing his decisions on a fleeting feeling.

It's just nice to know this side of a great scientist that I admire and to know that he also had had *nice feelings* - that this is still possible despite trying to be objective about the world.

Some personal notes: I think people should still be super careful about getting married or getting into a committment until after some time of getting to know oneself and another. And while committment entails responsibility, some sense of entanglement, I think individuals should not be too enmeshed that they are no longer their own selves. Nor do I think that they should be too distant that they feel alone even while they're together. And I think it is important to know when to [walk away](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YGV5o6UHjxM) and conquer the [fears of leaving a relationship](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PRhQMf5HMHU) when necessary. And that would require some deep and nuanced examination. Going back to Feynman, it seems like he and his wives had brought out the best in each other. I think this consideration is important even when choosing friends. And there's a part of me that still thinks romantic love is not necessary in living a full life - although it is a nice feeling to have when you do feel it, whether it lives in the safe confines of one's imagination or is mutual.
