---
layout: posts
title: "Aromantic"
categories: Life, CMS Work
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "Grounded in reality"
math: true
---


*Something I wrote over a lunch break.*

I’m aromantic.
Ok, no that’s not entirely true.
I am romantic in other aspects. Not the troubadour idea of romantic. I try to be practical about things. I’m not a giver of flowers or fancy gifts. My gifts are either useful or things I find meaningful like a book. And I give books to all my friends anyhoo. I still listen to love songs but I sometimes cringe listening to the lyrics. I can “feel” too. I think *It’s not the love of one person that matters most in life. But the love of life.* It’s from Before Midnight. My love language is not wordy even I could be verbose in writing. I know it's changeable, the love language (if they are even real), but there are things we'd prefer to keep the same way.

I’m romantic about science. Like, I love thinking about how we are made of starstuff and that we live in this tiny pale blue dot. I love thinking about analogous systems - like how the same math can describe an LC circuit and a harmonic oscillator. It’s a common theme in physics - two different forms but actually the same thing. In nature you’d find neural connections and similar they are to social networks, the large scale structure of the universe, and mycelium network - the internet of plants. They’re fascinating. And they get me past the tedium of cleaning large datasets and making plots. These things give me meaning in life. These give me joy, awe and wonder.

So I’m not entirely aromantic. I also know that there’s reality that we have to accept. There are physical laws that have to be recognized. It is important to be grounded in reality. “Creativity is imagination in a straitjacket”, said Richard Feynman. I think the constraints we encounter are what makes us even more creative and imaginative. It’s like if we had all the time in the world, wouldn’t that make us bored with life? Wouldn’t that not make us feel challenged to do something worthwhile? And what would “worthwhile” even mean if we could live forever?


So, I’m a pragmatic romantic. Coined that since 2014. :P
I have an idea of love, but it’s not the same as how movies and troubadours defined it.
I don’t even think that my idea of love is clear. It is nebulous and evolving.
I’m not “in love” with any idea of love. At least I do not think so.
There are some things that I have struck out in how I currently define love.
There are common themes that remain.
There are new well-defined ideas - like love being a verb and not unconditional. 
Not going to talk too much about this. 
I hope it will just be felt and seen by those I love.
And here by love, is not constrained to a person I have romantic/erotic feelings for.
I hope they feel free but also feel supported.
I’m just right here even if I’m far.

#novelty #predictability 
#freedom #solidarity 
#individuality #reliability 
