---
layout: posts
title: "Mama"
categories: Comedy, Life
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "What I wish I could do"
math: true
---

I miss my mama. Although I never really tell her that. Our interactions are almost always funny and are mostly about logistics. She's a problem solver. I've always admired that about her. She is very encouraging and we rarely have dramatic conversations and if there are any she would always sprinkle a joke here and there. So when she had heard I was sick for a while during the pandemic, I was surprised when she admitted that she had been crying a "bucket of tears" while she was washing clothes. She still handwashes all of the clothes at home because we have no washing machine. You know what she told me? "Iyak ako nang iyak nung naglalaba ako. Yung luha ko yung pinanlaba ko sa damit. Sana bobo ko na lang para hindi ka malayo!" (*I was crying so hard when I was washing clothes. I used my tears to wash clothes and I wished you were stupid so you didn't have to leave my side!*) hahahahaha. I sent this to Mbel and she laughed so hard!

She's not a perfect mom. Before she got any chance to self-actualize or make a career, she got pregnant early and I would say got married to a rather "spoiled child who came from an old rich family" then. All my neurotic genes and seriousness I believe from the father side haha. But to be fair I believe my dad has grown up a little bit and is trying to get closer to me ever since my divorce. But my mom, the last of five kids (all valedictorians), was the daughter of a carpenter and a laundry woman, who'd wash clothes in the river at the foothills of a mountain. She's pretty smart. When my mom and dad separated, we lived there for a while. It was a far cry from the life I had in the city. I felt incredibly sad at first. We had a black and white TV and our antenna could only capture one channel. It also explains why I was never into Harry Potter when it exploded. Lol. (J.K. Rowling sucks anyway!) It was around that time. But we had radios and Irish/American Boy Bands were super popular! And in the morning before going to school, we'd take a bath from a barrell of rainwater! It was super cold! But that period made my life more interesting. I'd see horses in the morning carrying coconuts. Smell horse poop everywhere! I'd go deep into the forest with my grandmom. I would watch her harvest coffee and help with getting coconuts so she could earn some money. And she'd do "faith healing" too! Sometimes I would walk this narrow road extending all the way to the town center. I looked a little different because my dad's family has a strong Spanish blood so my skin was whiter than most people and people always stared at me. It made me really conscious. And there was a strong accent there that I was trying not to have! (Because people in Manila laugh at this provincial accent!) I think I still have that accent though if I'm talking to my townswmen. It's kinda fun listening to [it](https://youtu.be/Y3xZMIVAfGo) right now.

My mom really worked hard to get us through school. (Papa would also try his best to send some money.) Trying to talk to politicians or nuns if we could get some help getting the best education in Laguna. And I think I had the best education locally and eventually she didn't have to ask for support on my behalf because I got some merit scholarships from high school. And I would be happy everytime I get those scholarships because I think about mama and how she's always trying to make things work. But on the downside, I had internal pressure on myself to not lose those scholarships because of how difficult life was. The thing is though, and I am always thankful for this, she never ever pressured me herself. NEVER. She wasn't a tiger mom. When I had to choose between physics and a prestigious business course, she gave me the freedom to be a physicist instead of a rich investment banker. And she let me love who I wanted to love. And I will always love her for those things. Even up to today, the Filipino culture of sending money back to your family is a very strong culture, she had given me the freedom to send only what I can. Sometimes, I don't even send. She never puts up a drama but she would tell me if she really needs it sometimes like when my nephew has gotten sick. She is never manipulative. (She told me Boiboi hated the nurses who injected him and said "ShooShoo!").

She'd do everything she can to provide what we need. Although she is lacking in the emotional aspects, i.e. giving us advice and processing things. She's a good listener though. She is an amazing person. Sometimes she'd secretly work as a caregiver to old people. She earns a little more money like that. She'd tell me that at first that these people can be nasty curmudgeons in the beginning but she was always kind and compassionate and eventually get their good sides. She'd be very patient in listening to repetitive stories from their youth and she'd do the disgusting parts of bathing and cleaning them with real care. She never complains about them. It was always delightful to listen to her stories! And of course the jokes she cracks just make my tummy hurt! And because she is funny and kind, the old people she took care of didn't want her to leave. And until now they look for her and had wished she could work there forever. These are multiple people. But my mom has to go back to her real job as a professional and be with my siblings and my baby nephews and niece.

My mom is really kind. And it's not a fake kind of kind. I have to say that.

In college, she'd try to come to my dorm every week or every other week and hand me P200 (4 USD) for the following week. That money was always borrowed from some of her office mates. She only told me that "borrowing part" when I graduated. And I was always happy to just have a little bit for the week. IT was a fun puzzle challenge for me to stretch it out! (Although was kind of tough mentally too so I had poor grades in college.) I didn't realize that she felt so guilty about it. One time, I had found two pairs of legs in my small dingy room in the first place I rented when I finished college. When I opened the door I had found my mom and my ex-girlfriend, who had flown from Aklan talking seriously. The following day, my gf told me while we were having lunch at a food stall, "your mom said you never complained about anything she gave and that you always had a smile on your face." I sort of bawled in public. Because I didn't realize that. She consistently tried her very best so I thought I didn't have to ask more. She gave what she can. No, she gave more than what she can.

(Note: Ateneo/Katipunan was a rich neighborhood so I had mastered the art of budgeting and using spreadsheets for my finances. Scarcity is the most interesting/difficult economic problem and it can really shrink your mental bandwidth so I had learns some tricks to deal with it. Ateneo later gave me more support once I was diagnosed with Bipolar Disorder II. And my grades improved and I worried less about losing my scholarship. As I grew older, my emotion regulation skills has gotten a lot better and I owe ateneo a lot when it comes to helping me break the cycle of poverty in my family. Ateneo is a great institution. In fact, it has given a refund to all students during the pandemic and had decided to make all grades Pass or fail. This is what compassion is about. Better than most universities in the world in this aspect. And also just to clarify, not complaining is not a virtue. I'm gradually learning the art of complaining. :) Although I still love the part of myself that only desire simple things in life. I don't see myself working or living in a dog-eat-dog world).

 I feel lucky to feel a constant love and care from my mama. She's super busy right now though.. and we haven't really talked again. But should set some time to call her in the weekend. I hope I can bring her here when the world reopens and give her some break that she deserves. And eventually, I could reach an economical state where I could let her relax and retire... It's a long way ahead but it gives my life some sense of meaning. Something I could do on the small scale after thinking about many big scale issues the past few weeks. I will do my best as she had always done for us. :)
