---
layout: posts
title: "Plus 11"
categories: Life, Physics
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "Doggie me"
math: true
---

I wasn't super sharp this week and I had thought that I should take a break and listen to what I feel. Take a break. Understand that I also have some disability/pathology to consider. Yup, self-care is important. And I've reached a point in my life that I am privileged to do this. So I took some time to walk along the side of the River Rhone. I had seen some dogs jumping into the water looking perfectly happy. I stopped at one point to take a video of a dog who had two sticks with him. His master had called him. He was thinking like "should I leave this stick? Nah. I want it." So he picked it up again and ran to his master. But even if his master had wanted to move forward, she waited for him, as he once again stayed at the side of the river to chew on his beloved big stick that he had grown attached to.

I like dogs. They make me happy. And they're just a joy to be with. I wish I had one. I wish I could hug a dog and it could instantly make me feel better. They're also pretty funny. I'm going to aim to get a dog some day.

Sometimes I think I'm like a dog. Derpy. Quite attached. To some stick, human or a squirrel. And if I remember the scent of a human I haven't seen I do get happy. And I also get sad when my humans are gone. But generally, I'm still happy if there's a ball, or a wide field.. or just something to play with.

In the past year I had gotten divorced, I'd broken my leg, moved to another country and had had covid-19 symptoms. I actually didn't realize this until my adviser has told me the circumstances of the past year. I thought that if I integrated all the experiences of the past year it was in sum, still the happiest year of my life. And that if something happens, I could go with a smile on my face. So the past year didn't feel like only one year has been added to my life. I feel 11 years older.

I had met all sorts of people, and I've learned to ask first and to be interested in who they are, their stories and their thoughts. I had learned to understand behaviours could have something behind them. I have not always had the best response, but I am learning to become more constant in trying to respond in a more understanding way. Whether they are snippy and blunt (which is a natural thing I try not to take personally) or when they become incredibly mean. Although I understand, it doesn't mean that I will always take them in with a wagging tail. I have to stomp my foot when's something's too much and it doesn't feel ok anymore. And I too conversely, would respect whatever boundaries have been set.

Some puppies who didn't spend enough time with their litter tend to have problem with "biting". Knowing when too much biting is too much. So humans who've had difficult childhoods probably has this problem too and need to be trained when to back off with the biting. Keeping those in mind I want to grow up to be a "good doggie".

<!-- I'm not sure if I intend to keep this blog... I am deciding. I think it has served its purpose. To share some thoughts, to express some things that I wanted to say... To think about science, how we think and deal with people... To talk about things that interest me but are not necessarily related to particle physics. Along the way though, I have unmasked some parts of me that I think I would prefer to keep only to a few people who deserve it. It was a good exercise. Each entry was always inspired and thought off carefully.  -->
