---
layout: posts
title: "LASERs, Stable Orbits and Steady State Physics"
categories: Physics, Science Communication
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "There's no such thing as a permanent state of excitation"
math: true
---

Conservation of Energy. It's a simple principle that tells us that the laws of physics a permanent state of excitation is impossible to sustain. Yep. Energy can neither be created nor destroyed. You'd need a constant input of energy to sustain such excitation.

When an incoming particle of sufficient energy strikes a luminescent material, its energy gets absorbed. The materials atoms get excited but they will eventually re-emit the the absorbed energy in the form of light. It relaxes back into a lower energy state.

LASERS work similarly. Einstein was actually also the person who laid the theoretical foundation of how LASERS work before one was made about 40 years later. Now I want to focus on what makes LASER light is focused and monochromatic unlike light from a light bulb. This time we don't just any particle with just energy. We start with a photon that has an energy just enough to make it jump to a specific energy level. Nothing more than that either. For the sake of visualization, this light starts from the left. Hits an electron. The electron goes up. Relaxes. Then it emits a photon of the same energy. The energy determines the color of the laser. For reference, the visible colors in the rainbow - red, orange, to violet, goes in increasing energy.

The light emitted by the initial excitation then continues to travel to the right, hits a mirror. I must remind you that the process is a lot more messier in reality. We're just trying to visualize things now. The photon bounces off the mirror, excites another atom. Another photon of the same energy travels to the left mirror and bounces off. Imagine, that there are a sea of atoms, and this process of excitation and de-excitation repeats itself. At some point, a photon would hit an atom that is *already* excited! This would actually force the electron to get de-excited and emit a photon of the same color. This process is called *stimulated emission*! You get a bunch of this coming out in a beam and you get your LASER. Neil deGrasse Tyson offers a good, animated explanation of it too in his show [StarTalk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t9jtGHXgQvw).

If it isn't obvious by now, LASER means *Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation*. Excitations, radiations aren't really sustainable things without energy input. Binary stars that are super attracted to each other, could "perform" a cosmic dance, radiate strong gravitational waves but they would eventually collapse, often catastrophically into a single object. For me these are all interesting. But what is more interesting to me are physical systems that over a long period of time seemed to have reached a state of equilibrium. In time scales that seem infinite compared to our time on earth, they seem to have found their place. The planets in our solar system for instance are relatively stable. Why aren't we spiralling into the sun? Or why aren't we falling into the black hole in the center of our galaxy? It's amazing how Earth's and other planets orbits are stable, and how an "unconscious" recalibration of their speed as they goes closer to the sun, cancel out the force that pulls them into a catastrophic spiral into the massive star.

[Vera Rubin](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9W3RsaWuCuE), a super duper underrated scientist whom I believe should have won the Noble prize, found something strange in her observation of galaxies. Classical gravitational physics predicts that the objects farther from the galactic center should be moving around slower than closer objects. What she found out was that the speed of these objects flattened out despite increasing distance. There also isn't enough visible matter that would cause such speeds to be sustained. And the only explanation was there must be something invisible halo that interacts with them gravitationally. This thing which is now infamouusly called "Dark Matter" is also what keeps the galaxies from disintegrating.

Einstein had a very nice visualization of how matter affects "spacetime". He thought of space time as a fabric. You place a massive object such as the sun, and another object like the earth, and their presence or masses distort the fabric accordingly. In the early universe, this fabric was quite smooth as matter was distributed evenly. But as always weird quantum stuff, fluctuations happened. And there were tiny "spots" that had more matter in it than the rest. The fabric was distorted more at these spots. These attracted more matter towards them, creating some weird structure and filaments throughout the entire universe. There is some kind of cosmic web that ties galaxies and even clusters of galaxies together despite being in a rapidly expanding universe.

As a former "science show" presenter, I loved explosive things that were exciting and fast. And only recently that I have developed a fondness for the slow, quiet and stable. For systems that reach steady state. They have become more mesmerizing for me. They consume my thoughts on some hours I don't do things directly related to my work. And it feels as if my interest has stabilized over some time scale for some unknown, invisible reason.  And it's just right... And there's probably no practical "outcome" expected from it. It's just there, radiating a quiet glow. And I don't know if we observe at a larger time scale if it will just dissipate, grow or remain as it is.
