---
layout: posts
title: "Beer, Coke and Science"
categories: Life, CMS Work
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "My first meaningful interaction"
math: true
---

I saw so many familiar faces at CERN this week but I didn't always feel comfortable striking long conversations with them. I did come across my instructor from last year's Data Analysis School and we agreed to hang out in Geneva last night. It was pretty cool because I considered it my first meaningful human interaction that was not business-related and not just small talk.

He lives and works in Hamburg so he's only here until Wednesday. My ex-roomie and her boyfriend also works there so I've extra reasons to visit Hamburg now!

Since we are both experimental physicists it was unavoidable for us to talk about science. We talked about other things of course, because we're humans too! E.g. how crappy the US health care system is, and i.e. we can tell a lot about a person the way the handle rejection and criticism. Ok, let me digress a bit more. We talked about that because he was honest with his ex-roomie that the food she prepared was not good, and he thought it wasn't good to lie. His friends told him "Why the fudge did you say that!". She got angry at him. I told him my opinion that it was probably better not to lie and you didn't try to be mean. I don't know how much he sugarcoated the truth. But the truth must be communicated. The manner of communication does matter a lot but sometimes there's only so much you can do. The truth will just sometimes hurt. Ok, ok, my train of thought just got derailed because now I remember my Japanese friends and how polite they are, and that in their culture it's absolute taboo to tell someone that their food sucks. Ok, just make a value judgment on how valuable it is for you to communicate some "truth". Ok... uhm. Let's go back to science.

He's pretty close to finishing his dissertation and he is now writing up his results. That's pretty inspiring. He works on searching for *long-lived supersymmetric (SUSY) particles* that has an interesting detector signature - *disappearing tracks*! So, this is pretty exotic and I think a challenging task. I told him I previously contributed technical work to an exotic search for signals of extradimensions in the diphoton channel. But now I am doing a precision measurement instead.

A friend of mine remarked that physics is weird and strange. Like the concept of quantum mechanics where a *cat could be both dead and alive* is absolutely unthinkable. I quickly remarked that yeah, nobody truly understands quantum mechanics. But there are some folks who would make use of this fuzziness to advance some quirky ideas that are to be honest, fascinating but untestable. And that is where I draw the line. If the idea is just beautiful, captivating in bar conversations, but cannot experimentally tested, we cannot do science.

It doesn't mean though that we cannot make guesses and mental models that could help us explain what we see in nature. People are free to conjecture that there are probably multiple universes. People are free to imagine that we are not really made of point-like particles but instead one-dimensional objects called *strings*. And with that mental model, you can probably achieve Einstein's dream of a unifying physics theory that could explain the biggest and the smallest of thing - a non-domain specific theory! It's beautiful. But to probe really small objects we would need to up the energy of our particle colliders. The Large Hadron Collider would be insufficient. A collider with a radius extending to Pluto wouldn't be enough either. So how do confirm that our mental model is correct or incorrect?

Now, we know our mental model of the cat being both dead and alive, or the *superposition of states* is a good model describing how particles are. I mean experiments confirm this weird model works and allows us to make predictions with repeatable results. (I did a quick search on quantum physics experiments for educators -[paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1806.09958.pdf)).

I haven't taken any formal classes on the philosophy of science. My opinions are mostly formed from experience and from listening to colleagues and the viewpoints of people like Richard Feynman and Einstein. I am not an absolute "empiricist" - i.e. someone who thinks that our knowledge of nature can only be derived from our senses. In a sense, our knowledge of the universe is constrained by what we can sense. Like, right now, we only know 4\% of the universe because dark energy and dark matter don't interact the same way as ordinary matter, like stars, planets in the night sky. So we have to find a way to "sense" or "see" them. I won't go into much detail.

And then there are issues about weird results, extraordinary claims that are not reproducible. There's this experiment called the DAMA LIBRA experiment that claims to have seen the annual modulation of dark matter that is expected. Basically, the earth is swimming in dark matter. At some points of the year it is swimming against it, and some points it would be swimming WITH the dark matter wind. So you will see this modulation in a form of a wave signal. You can read more about it [here](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-03991-y). They got a really high significance. Back in 2017, the significance was about 9 sigma and I think now it's up to 11 sigma, if I remember it correctly. Please don't always take my word for it. Nothing here is formal. For comparison, the Higgs discovery announcement was about 5 sigma. For those more familiar with p-values, that corresponds to a p-value of 1 in 3.5 million. "This is not the probability that the Higgs boson does or doesn't exist; rather, *it is the probability that if the particle does not exist*, it would be at least as extreme as what they observed." - [Kyle Cranmer](https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/five-sigmawhats-that/). So 11 sigma is incredibly high, but none of the other dark matter experiments corroborated the results. Something's fishy. A new experiment made use of the same sodium iodide crystals and under some exposure time, could also not reproduce that annual modulation. What could it be that's producing the modulation? Could it be some other particle from some other source? [This](https://www.quantamagazine.org/trouble-detected-in-infamous-dark-matter-signal-20180412/) is a nice article that also talks about it in accessible way.

My friend who has more experience than I do, said that in his work, he has to check against fake signals to and not miscontrue them as the exotic signal they are looking for. That's an incredibly important part of the work. And he's not alone in double, triple checking things.

There's a reason why, publishing experimental particle physics papers takes a while. At least at CERN you go through a lot of hoops and internal reviews. And those are for the papers you have direct contribution to. If you have enough technical contributions to the experiment (e.g. software, hardware), measured in terms of technical service hour credits, your name gets attached to every official paper released by your experiment during a certain time frame. So I would take the non-existence of papers under one's name, or the existence of hundreds of papers under one's name with a grain of salt. Also, typical metrics and citations, I'd be careful judging researchers on this field on that.

Finally, my friend and I talked about how people in the social science are doing some harder work. Unlike physics, there's no overarching framework or theory that could describe humans. He talked about his friend who studied people with autism. She made questionnaires and in the end didn't get enough data. I actually think that it's hard to write questionnaires. How do you know you are asking the right questions? What is a proper statisitical treatment on an incredibly smaller dataset? I don't know. I know nothing about this and I wonder about this.

It was a fun night. I feel good. At least now, through *proof by example* (or *inappropriate generalization*), I feel I can find new friends. But I never really replace the old ones. I am getting corny. I should get back to work now. I was finally able to relax. Am glad to be back thinking about things that make me human. Oh, btw, it sucks that diet coke/coke zero wasn't free in the bar! In Tuscaloosa, I would get free diet coke all the time!
