---
layout: posts
title: "We are all Janets"
categories: Life
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "Rebooting and Nudges"
math: true
---

If you're old enough and suffered a few disappointments that makes you say "*WAT DE AKTUAL PAK?!!*" (In Filipino accent), you've probably tried getting a makeover or trying something new etc. In my case, I cut my hair again by myself because, 40-60 chf for a haircut is too much for me. "*Mais pour les hommes, c'est 20 chf seulement!*" Maybe I can pretend to be a guy.

While these things have personally helped me each cycle of getting up, there was a far more difficult thing to do - to sit with your discomfort, not to feed it, but to try to understand it. It's been interesting so far because I found myself time travelling and examining histories! Histories - meaning including other people who've I've interacted with deeply. We unconsciously pick up or mirror their behaviours and how powerful they could be. Sometimes, you learn positive sounding things like "let bygones be bygones", because you were once an angry 18 year old kid and (your girlfriend was already 32 and was more "mature" (?)). And while this has been incredibly helpful for me when it comes to forgiving easily, it wasn't helpful for me in understanding people who hold on to anger. Or worse, I took their pain less seriously and merely dismissed their reactions as disproportional. It could be true that their anger was disproportional from an outsider's perspective but usually, we fail to imagine the details and histories of why one can react like that in the first place. But it is not always our responsibility to understand. In that case, we give them the space they need (or we ask for the space we need).. which could be like the distance from the earth to where the Voyager I is... 18.8 billion kilometers from earth.. (FUN FACT: If you send Voyager I a message travelling at the speed of light, it'll get to it by ~17 hours. And then if she's going to think about your message for a day or two, then total waiting time for a reply is like 90+ hours. If your message is even worth replying to. Anyway, another fun fact, Voyager I does send the earth status messages every day.) I do understand how difficult it is to have long distance relationships.

Anyway, simple sayings like "let bygones be bygones" do help and simplify things, but it doesn't really help if we want to truly heal from something or someone that had hurt us and made us angry. I do recommend listening to this NPR podcast from Life Kit on "[Why forgiveness actually heals you](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2hsbSwPUt43F43YBrUpsI2?si=ph6rZtsNS4qyy81w5XBQSg)".

An important note to myself after revisiting my own personal history is that it feels like I've time-travelled to 2014, only the number and the surrounding personnel changed. And I'm changing my course of action.. :)

# Habits

I've started some habit-building project in August. It was to cut both bad habits and form new ones. Actually, when I think about it - I've been doing it since April in 21-day cycles. Things I consistently did were: Walk outside, Do N deep work hours (where N={2-6} hours), study French. There were a whole lot of other things in my list of habits which I tracked in an app. The special thing about my list of habits in August was that they were a list of things to work on my "inner self". I will leave you to imagine my list but the idea was they were easy to track, doable within a day, and did not exclude "physiological health". After all, regular cardio wasn't just for getting "fit and sexy" but it was really aimed for my mental and emotional health. Getting some sun too was important. In fact, when I was cat sitting in France, the first thing I did in the morning was to get out and water the plants at around 10 am (yep! I woke up late because I watch TV at night). It was almost like I was a plant myself - photosynthesizing vitamin D. Taking care of my physical self was both an end and a means in itself.

I also read a lot of books since August. Many of them self-help books hehehe. Don't care if you judge me. A number of them popular social science books like Dan Gilbert's "**Stumbling on Happiness**". Right now, am on a third Brené Brown's book. I find her research methodology and findings interesting. If you don't know her she's a "shame and vulnerability" researcher. I like her. I read her books every day and *I have learned how neurotic she is*.

Perhaps one of the most important things that I did (that I can share), was to reduce my Deep Work Hours to just 4 a day. There are many days I go beyond 4, specially when I'm just "into it" and just go straight 6-9 hours of concentrated work/thinking. But most days, 4 is good and healthy. On rare occasions, I could do 2. And I've made it a point to keep my weekends sacred. After reading the "Zen Programmer" book, I've just learned to be more attuned to physical symptoms of stress and other things. So if I'm hungry, I eat. If I've got to go pee, I go pee. If I'm sleepy, I take a nap. If I feel a tightness in my chest, I do some deep inhalations. - I've always wondered why I've been doing this weird breathing. I think programmers forget to breathe sometimes. It's not just me, apparently! (How the hell do we forget to breathe?). And yeah, if I'm tired, I take a break. Those are simple things. But there was one thing that striked me, "*If you have a problem that's bothering you, clear that first.*" You need to be *present* to your code/physics to do it properly. So, if there are some chores, like paying the bills, doing laundry that I need to do, I schedule a time for doing them - that clears my mind. I also find just cleaning your surroundings clears your mind. Sometimes, the problem can't be fixed, like an emotional one, so talking to someone I trust, writing it out, going for a walk/run, meditating helps me. Actually, sometimes I cry while coding, hahaha. It's all right to cry - it's a good tranquilizer! I'm super happy that I'm alone in my office all the time!

*Note: I'm sorry for those I didn't let cry just because I became for a time judgmental of my own crying.*

# Defaulting

Going back to the city has its challenges. I have room mates. Three weeks of absolute solitude in the Jura was really helpful for me. But I felt that I need to see if my "model" of the world and emotion-regulation skills are pretty robust. I'm pretty happy to say that for the most part it was. Like I was able to keep out of social media. I was still pretty satisfied with work. I was accomplishing things and not feeling too exhausted. And I was still making time for others and also making time for myself. I felt healthy for the most part. I still get sad sometimes but it's no longer the type that I no longer recognized myself - i.e. not having a usual smile on my face or not thinking of something funny.

*Malheureusment!* I started drinking Coke again! I started eating Pringles and Mcdonald's and checking social media more than two times a week! I skipped *exercise* some days! I can blame the *forking* gloomy weather, the lack of sunlight, or the Gods for giving me extra work tasks - but I just need to adjust. And sometimes play things by ear. My recent previous counselor told me to use this visualization: "Muhammad Ali on the ropes,
rope-a-doping Joe Frazier in *Thrilla in Manila*"! It's like when life throws you melons kind of thing.

I notice that defaulting happens when I am quite stressed or tired. This week was sort of crazy. We are undermanned in our group and I volunteered to do a shift at P5 of the LHC! I'm super tired but it was rewarding and I met some folks from our group in person, finally! I'm still committed to software work but I think I would like to have some experience working downstairs at the cavern where the CMS detector is. Let's see if I get that chance! Anyways, I just finished a Mcdonald's french fries and a large coke zero. And a box of chocolates.

# It was never about "pure" self-control

While I was also "ok" with pure self-control, the sustainability of good behaviours or curbing bad habits wasn't just about pure self-control. A lot of it was setting the conditions for you to be able to sustain those habits. For example, to be able to run every day and avoid social media, I have the privilege to do so (and am exercising my privilege). Like I said before, if you live in a nice area, it's quite motivating to go for a run. Or if you ask a friend to run with you regularly, it's quite motivating too. ( I don't like running with anyone though. ) As for minimizing social media use, I find that uninstalling the apps and blocking them for lengthy time periods, are good deterrents for use. Knowing what value and purpose they serve in your life, also helps with maximizing the the little time you spend on them. I noticed that I get a lot of anxiety from social media so I really minimize my use of it. Replacing social media with other activities that fill your day is also excellent. I used to find reading books as compelling replacements in August, but now I couldn't find good enough books to read that I only read for an hour a day. So, I'm still figuring out what would be good leisure replacements. Well, the key idea is you'd like to have "meaningful and satisfying" replacements. I understand that some of these are not affordable for everyone. I have thought of some candidate replacements - joining a hackathon, listening to podcasts, hiking/climbing, and making *a robot that slaps you if you open facebook*.

I actually do find the act of *maintaining streaks* extremely helpful. But I have to be incredibly selective which streaks are the most important. For example, on a rather busy day, I'd choose meditating over duolingo French. Am also thinking about putting some of my fitness bands hanging somewhere visible, just like how visible my meds are from where I sleep and work in my room. And I should probably prepare good breakfast at night and meal prep so I don't default to junk food on bad days. These things are called **Nudges** which are some sort of "cheap" way to influence you in making the "right" decision to achieve an end.

# REBOOT ME

I've not been super consistent with my good habits the past few days so I feel like it's time to get REBOOTED. I've also been Sherlock Holmes-ing some old code bugs and had only figured out what was wrong with it today. So I decided after that that I would just rest tonight and have some alone time in the weekend.

 If you've watched "The Good Place" every time Janet gets rebooted she becomes a slightly improved version of herself. And since she's the age of the universe, she's been rebooted multiple times so she's super smart and has developed a complex consciousness similar to that of a human (which is funny because it made her weirder). Ok, Imma sleep now. PEACE OUT.
