---
layout: posts
title: "Messi Quandary"
categories: Football
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "Where's the joy in football?"
math: true
---

Back in 2011, Messi was [interviewed](https://youtu.be/RaupsXlJ3Xk?t=41) before the final of the Champions league against Manchester United. I liked that interview because, he exhibited that attitude of someone who derives childlike pleasure and joy in what he's doing. And I sort of tried to emulate him in many ways - his attitude towards the game and life. He values the collective. He focuses on the game and less on the theatrics. "Messi es un perro", this moving [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mg9fDOvE80g) with a narration of Hernan Casari's work illustrates that. Overall he seems like a mostly level-headed and grounded person on top of all his talents - his goal-scoring ability, his passing ability, his vision. He is a Genius.

## Coaching Philosophy

By the time the 8-2 loss to Bayern Munich came a few weeks ago, I've already detached myself from FC Barcelona. I've always admitted, I loved Messi first. I discovered Messi first before I loved the club. I loved the club because of Messi. I fell in love further with the club because of the DNA, the "Tiki-Taka" philosophy that started with Cruyff and was carried on by Pep Guardiola and Tito Vilanova before he died of cancer. Barcelona was always a joy to watch even if they lost, which happened very rarely. And I witnessed the times when Messi beat Gerd Muller's record for most goals in a calendar year (91 goals)! Eventually, he also outscored [Paulino Alcantara](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paulino_Alc%C3%A1ntara), a Filipino. He held the record for the most goals scored for the club (FCB) for many years. Messi continued to deliver assists, break goal-scoring records, but what once made the club beautiful had disappeared. They no longer played that breathtaking attacking football. They tried to replace it with something "pragmatic". But even their pragmatism didn't work. It was obvious that the players, and Messi were losing the joy they once had with a high ball posession and game control.

Among the recent coaches that were relative "disasters" compared to Pep, it was Tata Martino that I liked the most. He only served one year. That was the first time that Barcelona was trophyless after the Guardiola era. He had resigned. But I liked him because his football had a personality. "Verticalidad". There was always an effort to bring the ball forward to the opponent's goal. So it was exciting to watch. You could see this in a lot of his Argentina and Atlanta United games. Argentina, without Messi, had actually beaten Germany in a friendly soon after 2014WC under Tata. When I say his football had a personality - he "KNEW" what his football was about. He was clear. He wasn't unlike Sampaoli, Valverde or Setien who lost their style and succumbed to the pressure. So even if he lost two finals with Argentina, lost the final game in 2014 in La Liga against Atletico Madrid, I was fond of him. In Barcelona, he came after the death of Tito Vilanova. He had an injured Neymar, and he didn't have the players he needed. But despite it all he performed well, at least in my eyes. All of his notable defeats were close losses - again the two finals in Copa America (both lost in penalties vs Chile), the 2014 La Liga Final day, in the 2010 World Cup in the QF they almost beat Spain too. (I would not put Luis Enrique in any of the good or bad coach categories. He won the treble and almost got the sextuple in 2015!)

During the Guardiola era and during the height of Spain's dominance, good technical ability on the ball and tactical prowess became superior over athleticism. The English Premiere league lacked the former until teams began to hire good technical coaches including Guardiola and Klopp. And then recently, you could see how teams like Liverpool and Bayern Munich now are complete in all aspects. They have athletic, fast and agile players who are good on and off the ball. They are also good tactically. Bayern's current coach, Hansi Flick, it turns out was also Germany's assistant coach to Joachim Lowe during the 2014 world cup. So, the 7-1 demolition of Brazil seems eerily similar to the 8-2 demolition of Barcelona.

## Collective Degradation and Messi's Evolution

Messi was famous for his False 9 role during the Guardiola era and was then moved to RW during Enrique's time. He performed well in both. Now, I often see him play deep just to collect the ball and facilitate the movement forward. He doubles as a [playmaker](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YIXlqiOwMAQ) where he watches out for the runs of Suarez, Alba and others who could run behind the defense. He is 33 now so he had lost the speed he once had in his youth (see [Getafe](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mMiL4_1Yewg) and [Real Madrid SF 2011](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UscczWoT7yY) goals). But his simple feints and trickery are still there. He not only has, physical and technical ability, he's also very creative. The only aspect he is really lacking at is heading.

 Messi continued to provide staggering assists and goal numbers - as proven by his Pichichi and Golden Boot trophies. Barcelona, on the other hand, has been "rotting" collectively. There is no consistent style of play. Even the athletic department, the physios aren't that good. The recent transfers have been economic disasters. Players weren't really bought for the sake of building a team according to a plan. The team lacks width, speed in the flanks but no proper left or right backs were purchased. There were only *stop-gap* solutions, like using Sergi Roberto as an RW, Midfielder, and RB doesn't really work consistently. He just really gained popularity because of the infamous "[Remontada](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FC_Barcelona_6%E2%80%931_Paris_Saint-Germain_F.C.)" against [PSG](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h4m68r8kWAc). There were totally questionable signings since the advent of Rosell and Bartomeu presidencies. I personally think they tainted Barcelona's spirit.

'La Masia' products aren't cultivated anymore. La Masia is where players like Xavi, Iniesta, Messi, Busquets, Puyol and Pique were grown. It took more than 5 years before the First team finally let kids like "Ansu Fati" and "Riqui Puig" play more regularly! And that's only because Barcelona weren't able to sign proper players during the transfer window. That left them with only a small number of players to rotate on fresh legs in matches. Ridiculous.

So, the past few years it was a pain to watch Barcelona. Only watching Messi, occasional Suarez masterclasses, and seeing the promising kids are what kept me watching.


## Let Messi Go

When news broke out that Messi wanted out, I didn't really react. In my heart I thought, he deserves to play his final years with the joy he once had. I agree with him that the President of the Club did not keep his word. The real final date of the season was moved because of the pandemic. Even if I really wanted him to move on, maybe see him play for Man City or PSG, I also feel for my friends who want to see him play at the Camp Nou. I have seen him play there but they had lost the tie to Athletic Bilbao. So, it wasn't a total joy for me even if  Messi scored.

I feel that it is difficult for Messi to have his committment questioned after many years of doing his best for the club. One, two and then several years of a downward spiral, with no real and deep change on the part of the club - Messi should be allowed to go.

In the end, he decided to stay for one more year. But I cannot imagine how difficult it was for him to arrive at this [decision](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uyHi1FSuGkQ).
