---
layout: posts
title: "Weird Brain"
categories: Life, Pleasant thoughts series
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "Birds, Brains and Bird Brains"
math: true
---

I usually do the things I've set out to do but I think I'm not up for everything now. I've given myself a little bit more room to do whatever I feel like doing. Still done nothing stupid though. Started to listen to upbeat music again, and running in bits but maybe I haven't gotten back to comedy fully. Upbeat music really helped last night.

Yesterday, I got a call from a friend from 6 years ago. It is funny that I have sort of deeply desired for many years to have that kind of conversation with her, but through voice. That desire has waned in the past year. Only when I didn't want it so much that I got it. But the ring from her was still a welcome distraction. I see that we are different in a fundamental kind of way too. But it was enjoyable to talk to her as always. Our very filipino sense of humor is still the same. And I had told her that I wished if I was a little more robust back then and if the circumstances were different, I would have kept her as a close friend. She could be a really good friend still. Nothing more.

2014 was a pivotal year. When I was young, I was more impulsive, probably more emotional. And I wanted more and more out of life. If there was any point in history that I wanted to go back to, it was that year. I was still not in the business of slowing down. Everything was fast, follow your intuition (without checking) kind of thing. I had been very attached to this friend. Losing her back then was the most painful thing I have experienced in my life. It's like losing someone through death. Or it was probably described exactly like [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VDF75MM9Y1M). But that part's not up to me and I understand why it has to be like that sometimes. I try to not do it myself though. I dislike the nature of this very modern thing but I also know that feelings are complex. At that time I was just too young to understand. But my whole world and sense of self, did fall apart for a while. That's just the nature of it when it happens. It's a natural feeling we go through but it sucks. Specially when you're not sure what you did exactly. But it gets better with time. I just had decided I don't like feeling that way again and again. So I have let go of the idea of feeling things. The problem is if you find someone who don't share that same idea with you. This mismatch of expectations would always be a problem.

After that period, I've focused on exercising everyday, getting really busy with physics and meeting people. When she had tried to talk to me casually, "Tell me a story", as if nothing happened, I could not. What had followed has a rich history on its own but I'd rather not tell here.

Why am I saying this? The brain fools you into picking cues that lures you in and wanting something more. It took me years to figure that out. I thought I was immune to it. I am not, apparently. Specially when meeting a kindred spirit. But I also know that if there are any weird psychosomatic effects we are not totally helpless. We can do something about it. We can allow ourselves to feel it rather than dismiss it. So I don't get angry. Although sometimes I wish I could so I could invent a reason why things happened the way they did. I don't try to ask anymore because that's all there is to it. It's just not the same. What has been said clearly I replay again and again. I highlight them. They rarely change. There is no mystery to be solved. It is not an interesting thing to think about. Nothing more.

I've not used the "replacement and feelings dilution technique" yet. But I have a bunch of plans in at least the next 21 days, at least. They'll be good distractions. They can give me a sense of purpose and meaning, all arbitrary but nevertheless good for the soul. Will try to feel good and so that I can be "cool" again. It's hard to pretend to be cool. I don't think it can be faked. Something else will just radiate out of you.

I told Canada girl, my old friend, that I had not regretted marrying my wife. That like in my case, there was no mystery in why we had to split up and I had told her that. And that I had loved and cared for her deeply and still am committed to her, but in a more detached way, to help her do the things she'd like to do for her life. The romantic feelings had long been gone and a deeper level of love remains -  one for a friend. I was honest to her from the beginning about the complexity of my feelings and my limits as a human being. I know these are deeply personal things, but I don't think I've really promoted this blog and I do not have any known followers. So for now, I just want to air out for a bit and will be thinking of letting go of this platform to start something new. Or just tweaking it so nothing nearly raw comes out. So far this is my only space. I don't like posting personal stuff on Twitter/Facebook/Instagram. So many fake personas. Because no one I know reads this. I can unpack. And I think that apart from just writing things I've learned, in physics or my own musings, I was hoping to get close to someone. And that last bit even if it sounds lame, had been a great motivation for me to write frequently. I will carry on in another form, of writing or making things even in the absence of that personal motivator.

I had also told Canada girl of a [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b9UUnorP-8U) I had woken up to yesterday morning about some species of birds and the idea of maternal attachment. The video was cute at the beginning. But then it became a little sad. The narrator had said that the young birds sometimes don't really get attached to their real mother. They get attached to the first thing they see moving. Then in the video you'd see a flock of baby birds following around a tractor, a boat or the boots of a scientist doing field work. In the words of the narrator, the baby birds don't have a sophisticated way of telling apart what's real or what's not. In the same way, we humans are sort of the same, we trot behind people we are attached to, even non-romantically. Sometimes we are lucky, and sometimes not so much and we get attached to "someone who is as relevant to our needs as a bicycle is to a goose.".

It is sad to watch that video. It feels true. But as always, I've learned to take new material with a grain of salt. While the birds have had been in a seemingly pathetic illusory state, it might have been perfectly happily trotting behind the boots of a farmer. And when it is no longer in sight, am not sure what the birds would do. Why does it matter? It might have been fun and it might have been totally enjoyable while it lasted. And we as humans once realizing that we were following something else, for a while would get hurt and grieve, but these feelings are temporary.

 And I still think [romanticism](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gjxs46mzcB8) is not essential to living a full life. There are other forms of love that are rather nice to cultivate. From the lunch scene in Before Midnight "it's not the love of one person that matters, but the love of life."

I am going to do my best to live every day the best way I can. No matter the conditions and constraints. As long as I'm not hurting anyone or doing anything unwelcome. Am going to take a break from writing too and rethink my ways. So it might take a while before I can write about the things I've said I'd like to write about.

But the truth is, I don't feel super ok now. It feels sort of worse than breaking my leg. Weird Brain. Again, it is what it is. 

 I'm going to get coke zero. I'm thirsty. And then maybe I'll hop on to a bus somewhere again. :)
