---
layout: posts
title: "Beginning 2020"
categories: Life
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "The obligatory review of the last decade and how I look forward to the next decade"
math: true
---
## Habits, streaks, books entering 2020
For the first time since after the candidacy exam and the accident, I was able to spend 7 hours max, and at least 3 hours doing deep work these past few days! I got my superpower back. (And if that superpower runs out, my doc gave me a new emergency pill.) I finished reading two books. I finally finished Messi's biography "Lionel Messi and the Art of Living". I also finished "How to fix a broken heart" by Guy Winch in one day. The last book reminded me of how I, or anyone for that matter, can have emotional pain that can also manifest itself as physical pain that can often be more crippling. Brain scans show that similar areas in the brain light up for both emotional and physical pain. One thing I've learned about myself is that I am probably a lot better at handling physical pain, haha. I didn't cry when I broke my tibia and fibula into pieces and I could even crack jokes the whole time I was waiting for people to get me to the hospital. I'm so weird. Or maybe the inflammation kicked in so fast I could barely feel the pain until surgery came.

Anyway, physics is back. French has been consistent. Exercise too, except I've been sick the past 2 days. I've consistenlty been reading too. I try to finish 5/%-10/% of the books I'm reading every day. And I've been reading multiple books. "The theory that would not die" is a book about Bayesian statistics, its history and how the 2nd world war was won by the British and their cohorts. I'm also reading "Recovery: Freedom from our Addictions" which is actually a good book to partner with "How to fix a broken heart". Because, indeed the people/pets that we get attached to are like drugs too. And the other book I am reading in parallel is "Buddha's Brain". Because I have a weird brain and maybe Buddhist practices can help me a little more.

I've read the most number of books in a year last year. I lost count how many. My top 2 books are Viktor Frankl's "Man's search for meaning" and "Ask Me about polyamory". I usually put fiction in a separate category since they impact me in a different way. "Man's search for meaning" was my attempt to understand a kind of suffering that I would probably not feel within my lifetime. It's also a kind of suffering I was privileged by random chance that my family and loved ones would never ever feel. To be stuck in a death camp, tortured, hungry and all the worse things a human could ever feel. It was interesting to find how some of these people still found compassion, hope and meaning in there. Heck, they even found humor in little things. There was an important question, do we need suffering to find meaning? An answer was, it is through finding meaning, or creating our own meaning that helps us get through suffering. When we grieve, lose people, we can find new meaning and most importantly find ourselves. (Of course, this is only said with the benefit of time passing because it f*cking hurt back then! And also am reminding myself to not lose myself again.).

A friend of mine lent me their book on "Ask me about polyamory". I've always been a serial monogamist. I wanted to break my stereotypes about polyamory. The book was so much more than I thought. It wasn't just about being able to date or commit to multiple people in an ethical way. It was also about communication, something I now know I clearly have trouble with. And also to accept and respect the clear message and boundaries. It was also about acknowledging uneasy feelings about being needy, vulnerable and knowing that love isn't necessarily a finite resource. It does not always need to be captured and put in clean boxes. And perhaps most importantly to "be tuned in to how to nourish ourselves". It's not another person's job to do that. And yet I think we should have enough empathy and be careful enough (not too much) about how we can impact others (see [Esther Perel's ghosting, simmering and icing](https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=esther+perel+ghosting) Take this with a grain of salt because Esther Perel's audience are typically monogamous).

## A Decade in review and of course the heartbreak addiction
I saw a bunch of social media posts of people posting their accomplishments the past decade or year. Maybe I should give it a try here, where my audience is supremely limited to very close people. So this is mostly for me. Maybe here I will list some major events instead of just accomplishments:

* Diagnosed with Bipolar disorder - 2010
* Fell in love with Soccer, Azkals (2010) and Lionel Messi (2011). Played my first football game 2011.
* Graduated from College - 2012
* Got my first job at The Mind Museum
* Got out of economic poverty, became self-sufficient, started saving and investing. I no longer worried about my next meal, where to live next or where to borrow money to survive the week. Am not super rich but I am more privileged than most about not worrying about basic necessities anymore.
* Read a lot of popular science books
* Got a summer studentship at CERN in 2015
* Diagnosed with Rheumatoid arthritis - 2016
* Broke up with my girlfriend of 5 years in 2013. She was Christian. Wouldn't have worked out and she is happy now. Pursued 5 women after her. lol. Rejected by 4. Got married with the 4th. Been together for 5 years but now we are separated and divorcing. Friends with the rest. The Japanese one has a cute kid now. Super friends with one from back home.
* Got into graduate school. Passed 4 written qualifying exams by 2017. Finished all courses in the spring of 2019. Passed oral candidacy exam by Fall 2019. Officially started my dissertation.
* Got into Therapy, broke negative patterns and made really good friends - perhaps the most important of all

I'm still reconciling a few things from the polyamory book and the "How to fix a broken heart book". The polyamory book talks about not putting walls and being able to occasionally live with uncertainty (despite clear communication). On the other hand, the 2nd books mostly talks about the classical no-contact rule and the act of blocking people in social media. This is based on the idea that love works like a drug and you have to go cold-turkey. Guy Winch, is more grounded in science and I understand how it works. So I understand how my ex-wife deals with this pain through this way.

I don't block people though because I know time can heal me. And I value connections and know why I chose to keep these people in my life in varying levels of depth. I think, I just avoid opening social media and distract myself with work, reading and other activities. It's not easy. I also have the benefit of not being able to be around the person I used to like a lot. But last time, it took me years to get over someone. I was not very angry at her. I was a little bit for a while. I have had the urge to follow another classic advise "Paint the person in the worst possible way". This will help you think that there's nothing good to go back to. But I realized, that I probably can handle the reality that this person is complex. That if she used me to fill a gap or boost her self-esteem, it was ok. She liked me a bit but wasn't sure because I was far. Feelings aren't always clean. I understand. And I accept that in myself too. So when my therapist told me to start blocking, I said "NO". Because, I have other ways to handle the withdrawal and the pain of losing someone.

Someone ghosted me before. That part was probably one of the worse feeling I've ever had and was not ok. But she probably needed that too because I was a mess. She did the right thing to turn me down back then. But I wish people knew that ghosting can be inhumane. I like how Esther Perel put it [here](https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=esther+perel+ghosting). But maybe that's just me.

I've mostly turned down men. But it was quick for me to do that because no kind of attachment ever develops unless it was a friend I've had for years. Also, very little to zero attraction. And one time I had to break it off with a woman I was very attached to. And at least from the last I remembered, I tried to be as compassionate as I can and thought it was a mutual agreement. But there is really no easy way to break somebody's heart. I tried to check in. But it turns out I shouldn't have done that. Because the way I dealt with things was very different from hers. I was trying to make myself feel better by trying to know if she was doing ok. But she wasn't. That broke my heart some more. So I've stopped checking.

> **Don't let someone find you until you find yourself.** -- Great Good Fine Ok, "Find Yourself"

## The next decade

> **Tuloy pa rin ang awit ng buhay ko... Handa na akong hamunin ang aking mundo... pagka't tuloy pa rin..** -- Neocolours, "Tuloy Pa Rin"

The last decade has been fun, enlightening but also extremely fucked up!
And am turning 30 in June. It's the age I wish I was when I was 12. I think it is not uncommon for us to have our hopes and dreams occasionally hinge on the people we love or think we love. And then they change their minds, or plan the thing you sort of wanted to do with them with someone else. I think I grew up a little bit because, I no longer deny feelings of hurt. I just let them pass and dissipate. It's ok. And then I let go. It is the most loving thing to do for yourself and the one you "loved". Hopefully it won't take a whole decade to let go, motherforker!

There's a few things I'd like to do as an individual and I mostly have control over this. Hopefully, external circumstances will go in my favor.

* GET TO CERN - be in the thick of things. Learn new technologies, new techniques and get to know really cool people. Join the LGBTQ club, chess club, board games club and soccer club. And maybe the improv group called "Large Improv Collider" (LIC). Climb Mont Blanc again and the Jura! Go to Einstein's house at Bern.
  - Heal my broken leg there. (Today, I practice being alone because my butler leaves town. So that's really good. I have found and contacted doctors too. I hope they reply soon so I can see them early on.)
* TRAVEL EUROPE ALONE or with some friends. And pay carbon offsets while at it.
* GRADUATE - Get a PhD in Particle Physics
  - I dreamed of getting into graduate school since I was in college. There were multiple people who chipped in to fly me to the US. My allomum, her friends and a friend from CERN, André. André told me that he has only one request, it was for me to graduate. I think I'm so close to the finish line. I owe this to them and I owe this to myself. I'd really like to get this dissertation done. To own it. To learn everything I can about it. To contribute to our knowledge about what makes us up.
  - Graduating for me is a milestone that allows me to be financially stable.. Something that I've not had for the most part of my life. (I am the first person in my family to graduate from college too.) So I place great value to this aspect of my life.
* GET A JOB
  - I'd like to go into industry where I could have finally have financial and creative autonomy. To be able to work on interesting projects not limited to specific topics dictated by funding agencies. If there is an interesting academic project then I will consider the academe.
  - Develop some expertise in something. lol.
* TO BE ABLE TO DO FUN PROJECTS
  - Blogging. A larger mealworm colony. Aquaponic system.
  - Interactive Online simulations for some thought experiments
  - Get HCAL detector Software working
* HAVE MY OWN DOG/s and/or CATS
* BUILD GENUINE FRIENDSHIPS
* TO START A FILIPINO SCIENTISTS PODCAST that is not in English with my friend Roel. - Puta. Gusto ko naman marinig tayo sa sariling wika natin! Mas malutong! Mas malayo at malalim ang mararating.
* ECONOMIC SAFETY NET for my family - without them knowing I am preparing this for them so they don't f*cking relax and depend on me! And even if they accidentally read this here, that safety net can only be activated in very special circumstances! lol.
* GET INVOLVED IN A PROJECT THAT DEALS WITH CLIMATE CHANGE AND GLOBAL DISEASES. Nuff said.
* READ at least 20 books a year. (I've finished two books now!)
* BUDDHA BRAIN - Go to Bhutan or Japan to shut up for a week. :)

And here some minor stuff that would be good:
* LEARN FRENCH, SPANISH, JAPANESE, etc. - conversational level!
* Finally get back to 18\% Body fat percentage hahaha
* Stalk Messi or have a picture with him.
* Don't ever be Vitamin D deficient again.

To managing the tension of filling my cup first and living outside of myself! To helping create social support for others - for a more equitable world!
To be aware of my privileges of being able to live in a first-world country!
To getting to 2030 without being sucked in a hurricane, frozen in a polar vortex, burned in a forrest fire, drowned out by rising sea levels, or eaten by fellow humans! wtf.

I'm mostly optimistic. I'm still optimistic about humans. I hope that part of me doesn't die.
