---
layout: posts
title: "Plus 11"
categories: Life, Physics
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "From a place of understanding"
math: true
---

I've learned this philosophy from Brené Brown of always assuming that people are always trying their best in life. Trying their best to be a good friend, trying their best to be a good spouse or trying their best to be a good student. And it helps to come from a point of view of understanding someone, what there intentions are and if there is a reason behind their distress and behaviour. This assumption, while seemingly simplistic has its advantages. It gives you some cognitive ease and it allows you to be more generous in understanding the situation of another person.

But I also understand that is not always easy to come from a position of understanding. Specially if the action is quite frequent. Frequent snippiness, frequent meanness, frequent calls for help, frequent violation of crossign boundaries. I for one, am not always emotionally robust. I don't always respond in the best way - calm and rational, and saying, "Hey I'm not ok with that". Or I can't always say straight that I was hurt. Although I believe I forgive quite easily and historically have learned to not hold on to anger very long, I think it contributes to people thinking "I [Uzzie] will always be here", "I am committed", "She will not have the strength to leave you hanging." And so I learned to listen "hey, that didn't feel so ok. I think I need to back off or I will need you to back off".

So it took me a while to get a divorce because I very rarely listened to what I truly felt. And if I had heard mean words that were said they came from a place of hurt rather than a pathology. I am thankful to my ex-spouse that the divorce had gone relatively smoothly. But even so, the history, the heavy feelings I think had taken a toll on my mental health. I haven't quite reasoned out to my immediate supervisors yet that this is my situation. And I had just said "I will pick up the pace" without any excuses. I think, again, these have taken a toll on mental health. And so I reached this point where I get sad about lame things. For instance, I believe I don't normally get too affected by snippiness at work or people forgetting my birthday. Non-family people I've really come to "love". I don't super care about this on an ordinary day, like if I was emotionally robust. And objectively I thought, "goddamn this feeling is pretty lame." I guess am just human. I still appreciate whatever there is and whoever remembered. But even if I have had always set my expectations low, deep inside I had wished for something more. What I wish for though is not a fundamental human right. And in a few days, in time, it'll be ok. :)

Therapy too hasn't been too good. But I've always thought therapists were just humans and they don't have an infinite well of patience to listen to you. I've sort of ended up with some therapists who offer simplistic solutions rather than allowing me to unpack the complexity of my dilemmas and let me decide on my own what to do. And one of the therapist has told me that I was delusional, to which I think she was probably right (despite being very careful about doing frequent cognitive checks). I know they are well-meaning. But advices like "keep things simple", "keep things tangible", aren't particularly suitable for me. I had to take an extra step to understand why these reductionistic statements help - "they help ease cognitive load". They free up mental bandwidth. You know just like "when life gives you lemons, make lemonade". They're simplistic, but they help.

Having been putting a lot of hours at work, dealing with a divorce and everything that's going into the world, I haven't been really taking good care of my inner world. And they've all occupied my working memory at the same time. At times, I had enjoyed being "in the flow" with my work, enjoying the routine of solving one problem at a time. But yesterday and today, I have reached some kind of breaking point. I need to do some repairing, napping and strategy rethinking so that I will enjoy life once more. When I've recharged I will write about this experiment on streaks, on being better, being in the flow, and whether I've gotten over this local minimum. And maybe write some comedy again.

And for all that has gone on, the broken leg, moving to Geneva, and covid19 symptoms, I feel 11 years older actually. My contribution to the failure of my marriage has not gone unexamined. And am trying to be a more loving person in a non-romantic sense...be more emotionally robust and I will do my best to let some things dissipate now so that I too will not long cross a line that has been set. Do not worry.

No improv/comedy podcast this weekend. I'm going to pack, and maybe go somewhere. Wherever some bus takes me. :)
