---
layout: posts
title: "Meditations on Loneliness and Grief"
categories: Life
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "2020"
math: true
---

I made a snow dog a few weekends back. I came back to the same mountains later and found the dog's head melted but its body still there. Like any snow structure, the dog was bound to melt away in the heat, its structure dissolved in unrecognizable pieces. It reminded me of the impermanence of things.

I've always wanted to have a dog. But it is not possible right now. I live in a hostel and my stay here in Europe is temporary. I need to go back to the United States at the end of the year to defend my thesis. People I meet here, that I grow close to, just come and go. I have to be nimble, always ready with the changing situations that I have. But after graduating, I want to start building roots and where, when and how, I cannot predict with 100 percent certainty.

While it's exciting to be able to go around the world, not having my really close friends or family physically around sometimes takes a toll on my psychological health. And it probably does too to my physical health. I used to dismiss this feeling as "illogical, and unecessarily depressing". Some people dismiss people who "don't know how to be alone" and "do not enjoy one's company". But I do enjoy my own company! I enjoy solitude! People rarely realize that one can also feel alone in the presence of others and not feel like they are seen or they belong. The feeling can also make one make wrong decisions or bend oneself, just to be chosen by someone or by a group of people.

After educating myself more about feelings of loneliness, it really does take a toll on one's overall health. There are some good podcasts from TED Radio Hour on [Meditations on Loneliness](https://open.spotify.com/episode/56J45Z8oQLvlMtFyUclLP7?si=ujoSxnWnRJCu4ASsVksfAA) and Brené Brown's interview with Dr. Vivek Murthy [on Loneliness and connection](https://open.spotify.com/episode/5k83Zo3xagECvKANgmcRTl?si=uRG2Z9UzSD-s2IWPS_b1WA). I might have written about this before, I love how [Dr. Murthy dissected](https://greatergood.berkeley.edu/article/item/how_loneliness_hurts_us_and_what_to_do_about_it) the possible origins of the feeling of loneliness. The feeling reflects the quality of one's intimate (partner or spouse), relational (circle of friends), and collective (community). I feel like I've worked on each of these aspects intentionally - connecting with real people here, making time for my mom, my sisters, my best pals, and volunteering. When one of those aspects suffer, through some form of loss, it still hits me. Even if I worked on "being cool", emotionally nimble and less attached.

There's a Buddhist saying that "the root of suffering is attachment". But there was a great speaker who once said, that it isn't really desire or attachment that's the problem. Desire and attachment are not necessarily bad. They bring joy and meaning to life even temporarily. What is wrong is the "clinging", the "clutching". That is what causes suffering. That is what hurts people. So, I am more inclined to let loose and let go earlier if it still causes suffering after trying to understand and mitigate the root causes of distress/problems.

It is also this finiteness and imperanence of time that I have been practicing to be fully present - to my work, for myself when I need it, and for the people I love. I know that I won't have moments with them forever, so I try, as much as possible make the most out of the short moments, the finite time that we have. In that way, I barely regret anything. But when I do, regret and wish I could turn back time, it was because I wish I didn't behave in a certain way. And I only realize that I had some patterns that I wanted to deeply fix because I'll find myself in the same situation, with the same feeling of loss and hurt. I realize that the intensity of the loss was what taught me a lesson. It was the intensity of the loss that drove me to really work deeply on myself, on the things that I wanted to change - like learning how to love, nourishing my own happiness by diversifying my euphoria sources (so I don't get addicted to people), and instead give joy to others.

Side Note:
*“To love without knowing how to love wounds the person we love.”* -Thich Nhat Hanh
When I first got into therapy, I realized I didn't know [how to love](https://www.brainpickings.org/2015/03/31/how-to-love-thich-nhat-hanh/) and that was one of the root causes of my own feeling of disconnection.

A lot of people felt loneliness and grief in an unprecedented intensity with the COVID-19 pandemic. That includes me. And so I read in addition to books on addiction, codependency, a book on Art Therapy which deals with complicated grief. A part of the book details the beginning of grief from someone who is still alive but has lost his or her memory. Somehow, the person is no longer the same person that you've come to know and love. That person is confused, doesn't know who they are. The emotional carnage coming from that struck me. I am reminded of my own memories about the people that I keep sacred in my brain, the people that I continue to love, and the people that I lost - and how they're always a part of me. Erasing my memories, specially the ones I treasure, would be like erasing who I am. I would not deprive anyone of the same right to want to keep memories of people that were once part of their life or even depriving them of their want to stay connected with someone.

I was emotional during the first few nights when I moved to Geneva last year. Because I felt like I was leaving my loved ones, again like I did back in Manila in 2016. But I also felt like I was so busy with work that I don't really have time to process what was going on. There was one TED talk that have stuck with me. It was a TED talk that I listened to on the plane from Atlanta to Paris - ["We don't move on from grief, We move forward with it."](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=khkJkR-ipfw). The speaker describes *grief as love with nowhere to go*.

I know in myself that I have the ability to make new connections with other people. I've proven that with time. But loss still stings. It stinks. It breaks my heart. But I also know I'm like Elle Woods, I'm super good at mending it and having positive distractions! hahaha

But sometimes, some losses are too big, I allow myself to feel it for a while. I slow down and reflect on what I could have done better. "Fail Fast. Fail often." they say. Perhaps better: "Fail mindfully".

I don't write this as a cry for help, or "please talk to me, I'm lonely". I just like thinking about these things on a "cerebral" level. And also maybe sometimes, I write to be understood by someone in the "void". It somehow gives me some agency over my feelings. Understanding my emotions, helps me suffer less. Understanding emotions, helps me to emphathize with others too. I write this as these feelings once again hit me so deeply today. But I need to get back to work, because I really want to graduate, get a job, live a good life and finally get a dog.

Anyway, if this is too sad, here are a bunch of [upbeat songs](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/5F0r5wZTCtd9yEBM2lSjAb?si=W2EbTZqOQ5ePc7YdjGhePg), some lyrics I fully disagree with intellectually but nevertheless feel. :P
