---
layout: posts
title: "What I write for"
categories: Life
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "Writing and putting together a mental model of the world"
math: true
---

**“Emotional upheavals touch every part of our lives. You don’t just lose a job, you don’t just get divorced. These things affect all aspects of who we are - our financial situation, our relationships with others, our view of ourselves, our issues of life and death. Writing helps us focus and organize our experience.” - Dr. James Pennebaker**

My past few months have been relatively serene despite some challenges and minor upheavals. I still feel very strongly, still get anxious but I am thankful that I can get back to some stable ground relatively quicker than I used to. I am helped by an anchoring practice taught to me by practicing zen and by deeply knowing myself better. Zen is the most important element in my "deep rewiring" - a reexamination of my past, my default behaviors, thought processes, deeply ingrained patterns that I knew I had to change to align myself to who I want to be. And who I want to be was a question I had to grapple with for almost the past two years.

 Despite the ability to feel good at the moment, there are some thoughts (perhaps too many), that I have been once again been juggling in my head. When I am in this situation, having too many questions unprocessed, I have learned that it is good to pause. I have joked to my friend that these many thought processes are like too many open tabs or too many open programs in one's laptop. If you have too many of them, no matter how smart you are, you're mental bandwidth will be filled and you will crash or hang. Lol. I have physical ways to deal with this, like running, walking, breathing, meditating and even cleaning the entire kitchen in the hostel! But these [feel-good-at-the-moment approaches do not really take away the problem/s](https://uzzielperez.github.io/life/2019/12/02/Pushing-yourself-is-reductionistic.html). But they help me endure the discomfort and that is incredibly vital! If the problems or questions are important enough, they are bound to return. Sometimes, they are worth dismissing. Sometimes, you've got to be curious, nondjudgemental, and explore 'Why are you back?', 'Why does it matter that I answer you?'. Sometimes there is an urgency to answer them when you have to make an important decision in your life.

Questions like, "Who am I?", "What can I offer?", "How do I become more loving?", "How can I become more happy and satisfied?", "What am I living for?", "How can I be a better friend?", "What are my boundaries?" are questions that pop in and out of my head. There is no magic answer to those questions. The external world can help inform our answers but the real most satisfying answers come from within. This means I take some time being alone -  have small or big doses of solitude depending on the situation.

I've had some times where I would go through a long hermit mode, "Dark Night of the Soul" which was something I thought was beyond depression. It was beyond a biochemical imbalance which could be restored by medication. But in extreme cases was needed and helped me endure the nights last year. It's more of like an emergent phenomenon beyond the individual components - the physical, mental, your biochemistry, your feelings, your consciousness, subconscious. In my case I required a more holistic approach - medication, therapy, nature, exercise, good nutrition, long stretches of isolation, but still getting in touch with my loved ones. I read, listened to podcasts, I went to the mountains and wrote a lot. I consumed a lot of Brené Brown (**[Gifts of Imperfection](http://www.drkatemarinchak.com/blog/2017/6/1/journaling-as-an-antidote-to-shame)** and **[Rising Strong](http://spirituallyteaching.blogspot.com/2016/02/rising-strong-and-writing-to-heal.html)**) on top of popsci books like *Sapiens* and *Stumbling on Happiness*. Reading and listening helps me feel less alone in my shame and difficulties. I did everything to mend something broken inside me but I also just took the time to sit with the discomfort and understand the events and actions that lead me there. The most important one of those hermit modes was my time at Crozet. I was very lucky to have the chance to pause while other people in the world are bombarded by one problem after another.

*The morning light after the long dark night makes it worth going through the night.*

When the night ended, I felt like I was Buddha reincarnated! Like I've got it all figured out for a while and I can move through the world knowing what I need to do! I felt clear-headed. I felt light-hearted. I felt more compassionate.

When I get back into the autopilot life, living through the busyness of the real world, I once again lose myself. I live like a zombie. Maybe out of burn out. Maybe out of a new situation that I thought I knew how to deal with but not really. So I hide a little in the forrest or the mountains or run/walk by the river or lake. I just feel lighter and that is more than enough. Not every "hiding" will lead to an epiphany, absolute clarity or enlightenment. When I do though, I like writing them up! (Even when I'm confused I write, anyway.)

I have not been publishing much lately because I thought I published compulsively and I felt I needed to really connect with real people instead of just talking to the void of the world wide web. I also needed some people to challenge my own worldviews (which can be narrow sometimes). But when I feel like I'm in a mini dark night of the soul, or there is some physics thing that I am confused about, I look back at my blog. I feel a sense of awe and wonder about how, I have for at least a brief moment in my life have a *clean understanding* of things. Sometimes, they, my understanding, need to be updated. Sometimes, they're classic. :)

Writing helps me tie up the lose ends. Writing helps me get rid of unecessary noise. It helps me understand and make sense of the confusing experiences we have of the world. The act of writing as Dr. Pennebaker said, "helps us focus and organize our experience" - it helps us build a "mental model of the world", even if it's just a temporary one, so we don't feel so lost and hopeless. And if sometimes sharing my own struggles and how I dealt with them helps another, I'm more than glad to be a little more vulnerable. :) For now, just exist.
