---
layout: posts
title: "Mind Matters"
categories: Life
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "Cancer Survivors"
math: true
---

I talked to two cancer survivors today and admired how they beat the disease. One had a rare stage four form of cancer and the other had Bone cancer.
I also learned that one of the people in our hostel beat cancer too. They were all treated here in Geneva. From what I've read, mind matters in cancer survival. But how does one set such a mindset?
Could one truly believe by repetition "Believe in the body's ability to heal itself" such a statement?

Chemo has also improved nowadays they said. My friend said she didn't lose her hair at that time and she beat cancer twice! So one could be hopeful.
Another tip they said was that alternative medicine really helped them a lot with the side effects. I just think that listening to patients stories matters a lot.

I asked them "Did you really believe that you will beat the disease?" They said, "Absolutely"! Anecdata gives us a glimpse of how [the will to live](https://med.stanford.edu/survivingcancer/cancers-existential-questions/cancer-will-to-live.html) matters a lot. They say that between two people who had the same "condition" or stage, the one who has a stronger will to live had better outcomes.

One of the distinct aspects of sickness behaviour is isolation and that "leave me alone" attitude. I think my aunt did that. I wonder if it would make a difference if cancer patients fought against that instinct to isolate and instead seek community and care. But perhaps I understand, when one is sick one does not have the same emotional tolerance and understanding. And the more benevolent feelings and understanding for others diminishes as one feels crappy all the time. "It's not you, it's me." The classical "How people treat you is how they feel about themselves" sort of thing. "Don't worry, it's not you."

But perhaps when one has cancer, life seems to revolve around the illness. My friend said that after chemo she went out and about and got some sun. Anyway, even if you didn't have cancer or some other chronic illness, it makes sense to try if you can, to do things that make you feel well.

The people you surround yourself with matters too - people who'd make you laugh, who'd cheer you up, who'd help with the logistics and perhaps a great team of doctors.
These are just some lessons from those who've gone through it.

P.S. Covid Precautions should be observed. That goes without saying.
