---
layout: posts
title: "Play"
categories: Life
author: Uzziel Perez
meta: "To recovery and to mastery"
math: true
---

In the book "Surely You're joking, Mr. Feynman", Richard Feynman recounts the story of how he got the Nobel Prize, some "Honor" shit he didn't care much about anyway. "I was in the cafeteria and some guy, fooling around, throws a plate in the air. As the plate went up in the air I saw it wobble, and I noticed the red medallion of Cornell on the plate going around. It was pretty obvious to me that the medallion went around faster than the wobbling. I had nothing to do, so I start figuring out the motion of the rotating plate. I discovered that when the angle is very slight, the medallion rotates twice as fast as the wobble rate—two to one. It came out of a complicated equation! I went on to work out equations for wobbles. Then I thought about how the electron orbits start to move in relativity. Then there's the Dirac equation in electrodynamics. And then quantum electrodynamics. And before I knew it… the whole business that I got the Nobel prize for came from that piddling around with the wobbling plate."

I read Feynman's book a lot in college as it was his spirit of curiosity and playfulness that got me through difficulties in physics and life. When we feel "safe", or we are in low-stakes environment, our adrenaline levels are low and we are able to explore contingencies and possibilities. I can imagine how it can open up brain pathways so we don't get stuck in the same ways of thinking and feel helpless.

Playfulness is quite hard to do for someone who'd has complex ptsd, or has had a stroke, depression or a physical condition which affects the physical brain. I'd like to think of mental play as a form of "physical therapy" for mental recovery. Perhaps, if one doesn't have access to guided psychedelics, which are now being used for dementia, Alzheimer's (see PS below) and treatment-resistant depression, one can use play therapy in addition to the standard suite of treatments out there. Hippocampal neurogenesis which could be spurred by psychedelics and learning can help ease the difficulties.

Feynman actually had a period of burnout when he had started his teaching after his wife had died. But it was this wobbling plate that reminded him of how he used to really enjoy thinking about physics. "So I got this new attitude. Now that I am burned out and I'll never accomplish anything, I've got this nice position at the university teaching classes which I rather enjoy, and just like I read the Arabian Nights for pleasure, I'm going to play with physics, whenever I want to, without worrying about any importance whatsoever."

Getting reminded of Feynman's "Wobbling Plate" story reminded me of how I used to enjoy exploring ideas even if I didn't "accomplish" anything. Instead of me simply staring at the computer screen trying to force out a summary for my dissertation committee meeting (all the serious work I could do in between multiple doctor's visits and support groups), I've decided to play more and draw more. And then summarize what I've learned at the end, something like cleaning up my mess. I'll know more later if this helps me to full recovery.                

I would never feel this psychological and physiological safety though hadn't it been for the support of my advisers, my loved ones, the folks at UA and CERN.
